A Security Operations Center (SOC) is a team of IT security professionals tasked with monitoring a company’s network and systems 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Their purpose of monitoring is to:

    Find vulnerabilities on the network: A vulnerability is a weakness that an attacker can exploit to carry out things beyond their permission level. A vulnerability might be discovered in any device’s software (operating system and programs) on the network, such as a server or a computer. For instance, the SOC might discover a set of MS Windows computers that must be patched against a specific published vulnerability. Strictly speaking, vulnerabilities are not necessarily the SOC’s responsibility; however, unfixed vulnerabilities affect the security level of the entire company.

    Detect unauthorized activity: Consider the case where an attacker discovered the username and password of one of the employees and used it to log in to the company system. It is crucial to detect this kind of unauthorized activity quickly before it causes any damage. Many clues can help us detect this, such as geographic location.

    Discover policy violations: A security policy is a set of rules and procedures created to help protect a company against security threats and ensure compliance. What is considered a violation would vary from one company to another; examples include downloading pirated media files and sending confidential company files insecurely.

    Detect intrusions: Intrusions refer to system and network intrusions. One example scenario would be an attacker successfully exploiting our web application. Another example scenario would be a user visiting a malicious site and getting their computer infected.

    Support with the incident response: An incident can be an observation, a policy violation, an intrusion attempt, or something more damaging such as a major breach. Responding correctly to a severe incident is not an easy task. The SOC can support the incident response team handle the situation.

